Watch a tilted torus get sliced by a moving plane.
Each slice is a level set of height: z = h.
Morse theory: topology changes only at critical heights.
We tilt the torus so the height function has 4 isolated critical points.
Min, two saddles, and a max—marked on the surface.
Start below: no intersection with the plane.
Rising past the minimum, one small loop appears.
Between min and first saddle: the loop grows.
At a saddle height, two loops merge through a pinch.
Between the saddles: the slice becomes two disjoint loops.
At the second saddle, they pinch again—back to one loop.
Approaching the maximum, the loop shrinks and vanishes.
Morse intuition: topology jumps only at critical heights.
Each saddle corresponds to a handle being attached.
A torus is built by one minimum, two saddles, and one maximum.